The Boat Race is a side-by-side rowing competition between the University of Oxford (sometimes referred to as the "Dark Blues") and the University of Cambridge (sometimes referred to as the "Light Blues"). First held in 1829, the race takes place on the 4.2-mile (6.8 km) Championship Course, between Putney and Mortlake on the River Thames in south-west London. The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities; it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and broadcast worldwide. Oxford went into the 2016 race as champions, having won the 2015 race by a margin of six lengths, but Cambridge led overall with 81 victories to Oxford's 79 (excluding the 1877 race, officially a dead heat though claimed as a victory by the Oxford crew).It was the first time in the history of The Boat Race that all four senior races – the men's, women's, men's reserves' and women's reserves' – were held on the same day and on the same course along the Tideway. Prior to 2015, the women's race, which first took place in 1927, was usually held at the Henley Boat Races along the 2,000-metre (2,200 yd) course; on at least two occasions in the interwar period, the women competed on the Thames between Chiswick and Kew. Oxford went into the race as reigning champions, having won the 2015 race by six and a half lengths, with Cambridge leading 41–29 overall. For the fourth year, the men's race was sponsored by BNY Mellon while the women's race was sponsored by BNY Mellon's subsidiary, Newton Investment Management. In January 2016, it was announced that the sponsors would donate the title sponsorship to Cancer Research UK and that the event was to be retitled "The Cancer Research UK Boat Races". There is no monetary award for winning the race, as the journalist Roger Alton notes: "It's the last great amateur event: seven months of pain for no prize money".On Sunday 27 March, the women's race started at 3:10 p.m. British Summer Time, the women's reserve race (between Oxford's Osiris and Cambridge's Blondie) at 3:25 p.m., the men's reserves' race (between Oxford's Isis and Cambridge's Goldie) fifteen minutes later and the men's race a further half-hour after that at 4:10 pm. The men's race was umpired for the fifth time by Simon Harris, who had overseen the inaugural Tideway running of the Women's Boat Race in 2015. He rowed for Cambridge in the 1982 and 1983 races and was most recently umpire for the men's race in 2010 Rob Clegg, umpire for the 2011 race and three-time Oxford Blue, took charge of the women's race. The men's and women's reserves' races were umpired by Sarah Winckless and Judith Packer respectively, Winckless becoming the first-ever female official of a men's race.Although around 250,000 spectators were expected to line the banks of the river, engineering works and poor weather reduced the attendance. The event was broadcast live in the United Kingdom on the BBC. Numerous broadcasters worldwide also showed the main races, including SuperSport across Africa, the EBU across Europe, SKY México across Central America, TSN in Canada and Fox Sports in Australia. It was also streamed live on BBC Online.
